CONSTITUTION
POLISH REPUBLIC

of April 2, 1997

PREAMBLE

For the sake of the existence and future of our homeland,

having regained the ability to decide sovereignly and democratically about her fate in 1989,

we, the Polish Nation - all citizens of the Republic of Poland,

both believers in God

being the source of truth, justice, goodness and beauty,

as well as those who do not share this faith,

and deriving these universal values from other sources,

equal in rights and obligations towards the common good - Poland,

grateful to our ancestors for their work, for the fight for independence paid for with enormous sacrifices, for the culture rooted in the Christian heritage of the Nation and universal human values,

referring to the best traditions of the First and Second Polish Republic,

obliged to pass on to future generations everything valuable from over a thousand years of achievements,

connected by bonds of community with our compatriots scattered around the world,

Conscious of the need to cooperate with all countries for the good of the Human Family,

mindful of the bitter experiences from the times when fundamental freedoms and human rights were violated in our homeland,

Desiring to forever guarantee civil rights and to ensure the reliability and efficiency of public institutions,

in a sense of responsibility before God or before one's own conscience,

we establish the Constitution of the Republic of Poland

as fundamental rights for the state

based on respect for freedom and justice, cooperation between authorities, social dialogue and the principle of subsidiarity strengthening the rights of citizens and their communities.

All those who will apply this Constitution for the good of the Third Republic,

we call on them to do so while ensuring the preservation of the inherent dignity of man,

his right to freedom and duty of solidarity with others,

and they considered respect for these principles to be the unshakable foundation of the Republic of Poland.

Chapter I
REPUBLIC

Art. 1

The Republic of Poland is the common good of all citizens.

Art. 2

The Republic of Poland is a democratic state ruled by law, implementing the principles of social justice.

Art. 3

The Republic of Poland is a unitary state.

Art. 4

The supreme power in the Republic of Poland belongs to the Nation.
The nation exercises power through its representatives or directly.
Art. 5

The Republic of Poland protects the independence and inviolability of its territory, ensures human and civil freedoms and rights as well as the security of citizens, protects the national heritage and ensures environmental protection, guided by the principle of sustainable development.

Art. 6

The Republic of Poland creates conditions for the dissemination and equal access to cultural goods, which are the source of the identity of the Polish nation, its survival and development.
The Republic of Poland provides assistance to Poles living abroad in maintaining their connections with the national cultural heritage.
Art. 7

Public authorities operate on the basis and within the limits of the law.

Art. 8

The Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic of Poland.
The provisions of the Constitution apply directly, unless the Constitution provides otherwise.
Art. 9

The Republic of Poland complies with international law binding on it.

Art. 10

The system of the Republic of Poland is based on the division and balance of legislative power, executive power and judicial power.
Legislative power is exercised by the Sejm and Senate, executive power by the President of the Republic of Poland and the Council of Ministers, and judicial power by courts and tribunals.
Article 11

The Republic of Poland ensures the freedom to create and operate political parties. Political parties bring together Polish citizens on the principles of voluntariness and equality in order to influence the shaping of state policy using democratic methods.
The financing of political parties is public.
Art. 12

The Republic of Poland ensures the freedom to create and operate trade unions, socio-professional organizations of farmers, associations, civic movements, other voluntary associations and foundations.

Art. 13

The existence of political parties and other organizations that refer in their programs to the totalitarian methods and practices of Nazism, fascism and communism, as well as those whose programs or activities assume or allow racial and national hatred, the use of violence in order to gain power or influence state policy or provides for the secrecy of structures or membership.

Art. 14

The Republic of Poland ensures freedom of the press and other means of social communication.

Art. 15

The territorial system of the Republic of Poland ensures the decentralization of public authority.
The basic territorial division of the state, taking into account social, economic or cultural ties and ensuring the ability of territorial units to perform public tasks, is defined by law.
Art. 16

All inhabitants of the units of basic territorial division constitute, by operation of law, a self-government community.
Local government participates in governance
public authority. The local government performs a significant part of the public tasks it is entitled to under the laws on its own behalf and under its own responsibility.
Art. 17

Professional self-governments may be established by statute, representing persons performing professions of public trust and ensuring the proper performance of these professions within the public interest and for its protection.
Other types of self-government may also be created by law. These local governments cannot violate the freedom to pursue a profession or limit the freedom to undertake a business activity.
Art. 18

Marriage as a union between a man and a woman, family, motherhood and parenthood are under the protection and care of the Republic of Poland.

Art. 19

The Republic of Poland provides special care to veterans of the fight for independence, especially war invalids.

Art. 20

A social market economy based on freedom of economic activity, private property and solidarity, dialogue and cooperation of social partners is the basis of the economic system of the Republic of Poland.

Art. 21.

The Republic of Poland protects property and the right of inheritance.
Expropriation is permissible only if it is carried out for public purposes and for just compensation.
Art. 22.

Restrictions on the freedom of economic activity are permitted only by statute and only for reasons of important public interest.

Art. 23

The basis of the state's agricultural system is the family farm. This rule does not violate the provisions of Art. 21 and art. 22.

Art. 24

The work is under the protection of the Republic of Poland. The state supervises the conditions of work.

Art. 25

Churches and other religious associations have equal rights.
Public authorities in the Republic of Poland remain impartial in matters of religious, ideological and philosophical beliefs, ensuring freedom of expression in public life.
Relations between the state and churches and other religious organizations are shaped on the principles of respect for their autonomy and mutual independence of each in its own scope, as well as cooperation for the good of man and the common good.
The relations between the Republic of Poland and the Catholic Church are determined by the international agreement concluded with the Holy See and by statute.
Relations between the Republic of Poland and other churches and religious associations are determined by laws adopted on the basis of agreements concluded by the Council of Ministers with their competent representatives.
Art. 26

The Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland serve to protect the independence of the state and the indivisibility of its territory and to ensure the security and inviolability of its borders.
The Armed Forces remain neutral in political matters and are subject to civilian and democratic control.
Art. 27

In the Republic of Poland, the official language is Polish. This provision does not violate the rights of national minorities arising from ratified international agreements.

Art. 28

The emblem of the Republic of Poland is the image of a white eagle with a crown in a red field.
The colors of the Republic of Poland are white and red.
The anthem of the Republic of Poland is Dąbrowski's Mazurka.
The emblem, colors and anthem of the Republic of Poland are subject to legal protection.
Details regarding the emblem, colors and anthem are specified by law.
Art. 29

The capital of the Republic of Poland is Warsaw.

Chapter II
FREEDOM, RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF MAN AND CITIZEN

GENERAL RULES

Art. 30

The inherent and inalienable dignity of man is the source of freedom and rights of man and citizen. It is inviolable, and its respect and protection is the responsibility of public authorities.

Article 31

Human freedom is protected by law.
Everyone is obliged to respect the freedoms and rights of others. No one may be forced to do what the law does not require him to do.
Restrictions on the exercise of constitutional freedoms and rights may be established only by statute and only when they are necessary in a democratic state for its security or public order, or for the protection of the environment, public health and morals, or the freedoms and rights of other persons. These limitations can not affect the substance of freedoms and rights.
Article 32

Everyone is equal before the law. Everyone has the right to equal treatment by public authorities.
No one may be discriminated against in political, social or economic life for any reason.
Art. 33

Women and men in the Republic of Poland have equal rights in family, political, social and economic life.
In particular, women and men have equal rights to education, employment and promotion, to equal remuneration for work of equal value, to social security and to hold positions, hold functions and obtain public honors and distinctions.
Art. 34

Polish citizenship is acquired by birth from parents who are Polish citizens. Other cases of acquiring Polish citizenship are specified in section
awa.
A Polish citizen cannot lose Polish citizenship unless he or she renounces it.
Article 35

The Republic of Poland ensures Polish citizens belonging to national and ethnic minorities the freedom to maintain and develop their own language, maintain customs and traditions, and develop their own culture.
National and ethnic minorities have the right to create their own educational and cultural institutions and institutions for the protection of religious identity and to participate in resolving matters relating to their cultural identity.
Art. 36

While staying abroad, a Polish citizen has the right to care from the Republic of Poland.

Article 37

Whoever is under the authority of the Republic of Poland enjoys the freedoms and rights provided for in the Constitution.
Exceptions to this rule relating to foreigners are specified by law.
PERSONAL FREEDOM AND RIGHTS

Article 38

The Republic of Poland provides every person with legal protection of life.

Art. 39

No one may be subjected to scientific experiments, including medical ones, without freely given consent.

Art. 40

No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Corporal punishment is prohibited.

Art. 41.

Everyone is guaranteed personal integrity and personal freedom. Deprivation or restriction of liberty may only occur under the terms and conditions specified in the Act.
Anyone deprived of liberty not pursuant to a court judgment has the right to appeal to a court to immediately determine the legality of such deprivation. The family or person designated by the person deprived of liberty shall be immediately notified of the deprivation of liberty.
Everyone detained should be informed immediately and in a way that is understandable to them about the reasons for their detention. He should be placed at the disposal of the court within 48 hours from the moment of arrest. The detainee should be released if, within 24 hours of being placed at the court's disposal, he is not served with a court decision on pre-trial detention along with the charges presented.
Everyone deprived of liberty should be treated humanely.
Everyone unlawfully deprived of liberty has the right to compensation.
Art. 42.

Only those who have committed an act prohibited under penalty by the law in force at the time of its commission are subject to criminal liability. This principle does not prevent punishment for an act which, at the time it was committed, constituted a crime under international law.
Everyone against whom criminal proceedings are brought has the right to defense at all stages of the proceedings. In particular, he may choose a defense lawyer or, under the terms specified in the Act, use a public defender.
Everyone is considered innocent until proven guilty by a final court judgment.
Art. 43

There is no statute of limitations for war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Art. 44

The limitation period for crimes not prosecuted for political reasons, committed by public officials or on their orders, is suspended until such reasons cease to exist.

Art. 45

Everyone has the right to a fair and public hearing without undue delay by a competent, impartial and independent court.
The hearing may be closed for reasons of morality, state security and public order, as well as for the protection of the private life of the parties or other important private interest. The verdict is announced publicly.
Art. 46

The forfeiture of items may only occur in cases specified in the Act and only on the basis of a final court decision.

Art. 47

Everyone has the right to legal protection of private and family life, honor and good name, as well as to make decisions about their personal life.

Art. 48

Parents have the right to raise their children in accordance with their own beliefs. This upbringing should take into account the child's level of maturity, as well as his or her freedom of conscience, religion and beliefs.
Limitation or deprivation of parental rights may only occur in cases specified in the Act and only on the basis of a final court decision.
Art. 49

Freedom and protection of the confidentiality of communications shall be ensured. They may be limited only in the cases specified in the Act and in the manner specified therein.

Art. 50

The integrity of the apartment is ensured. A search of an apartment, room or vehicle may only take place in the cases specified in the Act and in the manner specified therein.

Art. 51.

No one may be obliged, other than pursuant to the Act, to disclose information relating to his person.
Public authorities cannot obtain, collect and share information about citizens other than what is necessary in a democratic state ruled by law.
Everyone has the right to access official documents and data files relating to them. Limitations on this right may be determined by law.
Everyone has the right to request rectification and deletion of false, incomplete or collected information
in a manner contrary to the Act.
The rules and procedure for collecting and sharing information are specified in the Act.
Art. 52.

Everyone is guaranteed the freedom to move around the territory of the Republic of Poland and choose their place of residence and stay.
Everyone can freely leave the territory of the Republic of Poland.
The freedoms referred to in section 1 and 2 may be subject to limitations specified in the Act.
A Polish citizen cannot be expelled from the country or prohibited from returning to the country.
A person whose Polish origin has been confirmed in accordance with the Act may settle permanently in the territory of the Republic of Poland.
Art. 53.

Everyone is guaranteed freedom of conscience and religion.
Freedom of religion includes the freedom to profess or accept a religion of one's choice and to manifest one's religion, either alone or with others, in public or in private, in worship, prayer, observance, practice and teaching. Freedom of religion also includes the possession of temples and other places of worship depending on the needs of believers and the right of people to use religious services wherever they are.
Parents have the right to provide their children with a moral and religious upbringing and teaching in accordance with their beliefs. The provision of Art. 48 section 1 shall apply accordingly.
The religion of a church or other religious association with a regulated legal situation may be the subject of teaching at school, but the freedom of conscience and religion of other people may not be violated.
The freedom to manifest religion may be limited only by law and only when it is necessary to protect state security, public order, health, morals or the freedoms and rights of other persons.
No one may be forced to participate or not to participate in religious practices.
No one may be obliged by public authorities to disclose his/her worldview, religious beliefs or confession.
Art. 54

Everyone is guaranteed the freedom to express their views and obtain and disseminate information.
Preventive censorship of the media and press licensing are prohibited. The Act may introduce an obligation to obtain a license to operate a radio or television station in advance.
Art. 55

The extradition of a Polish citizen is prohibited, except for the cases specified in section 2 and 3.
The extradition of a Polish citizen may be carried out at the request of another state or an international judicial body, if such a possibility results from an international agreement ratified by the Republic of Poland or an act implementing an act of law established by an international organization of which the Republic of Poland is a member, provided that the act covered by the extradition request : :
1) was committed outside the territory of the Republic of Poland, and

2) constituted an offense under the law of the Republic of Poland or would constitute an offense under the law of the Republic of Poland if committed in the territory of the Republic of Poland, both at the time of its commission and at the time of submitting the application.

It does not require meeting the conditions specified in section 2 points 1 and 2, extradition to take place at the request of an international judicial body established on the basis of an international agreement ratified by the Republic of Poland, in connection with the crime of genocide, a crime against humanity, a war crime or the crime of aggression falling within the jurisdiction of this body.
Extradition is prohibited if it concerns a person suspected of committing a non-violent crime for political reasons or if it violates the freedoms and rights of humans and citizens.
The court decides on the admissibility of extradition.
Art. 56.

Foreigners may exercise the right of asylum in the Republic of Poland on the terms specified in the Act.
A foreigner who seeks protection against persecution in the Republic of Poland may be granted refugee status in accordance with international agreements binding on the Republic of Poland.
POLITICAL FREEDOM AND RIGHTS

Article 57

Everyone is guaranteed the freedom to organize and participate in peaceful assemblies. Limitations on this freedom may be determined by law.

Art. 58

Everyone is guaranteed freedom of association.
Associations whose purpose or activity is contrary to the Constitution or the Act are prohibited. The court decides on the refusal to register or prohibit the operation of such an association.
The Act specifies the types of associations subject to court registration, the registration procedure and the forms of supervision over these associations.
Art. 59

Freedom of association in trade unions, socio-professional organizations of farmers and employers' organizations is ensured.
Trade unions and employers and their organizations have the right to negotiate, in particular to resolve collective disputes, and to conclude collective labor agreements and other agreements.
Trade unions have the right to organize employee strikes and other forms of protest within the district limits
provided in the Act. For the sake of the public good, the law may limit or prohibit a strike with respect to specific categories of employees or in specific areas.
The scope of freedom of association in trade unions and employers' organizations and other trade union freedoms may be subject only to such statutory restrictions as are permitted by international agreements binding on the Republic of Poland.
Art. 60

Polish citizens enjoying full public rights have the right to access public service on equal terms.

Art. 61.

A citizen has the right to obtain information about the activities of public authorities and persons performing public functions. This right also includes obtaining information about the activities of economic and professional self-government bodies as well as other persons and organizational units to the extent that they perform the tasks of public authority and manage municipal property or the property of the State Treasury.
The right to obtain information includes access to documents and access to meetings of collegiate bodies of public authority resulting from universal elections, with the possibility of sound or image recording.
Limitation of the right referred to in section 1 and 2, may only take place due to the protection of freedoms and rights of other persons and economic entities as specified in the laws and the protection of public order, security or important economic interest of the state.
The procedure for providing the information referred to in section 1 and 2 are determined by statutes and, in the case of the Sejm and Senate, their regulations.
Art. 62.

A Polish citizen has the right to participate in a referendum and the right to elect the President of the Republic of Poland, MPs, senators and representatives to local government bodies if he or she turns 18 on the day of voting at the latest.
The right to participate in a referendum and the right to vote is not available to persons who are incapacitated or deprived of public or electoral rights by a final court decision.
Art. 63.

Everyone has the right to submit petitions, applications and complaints in the public interest, in their own interest or in the interest of another person with their consent, to public authorities and to social organizations and institutions in connection with the performance of their tasks in the field of public administration. The procedure for considering petitions, applications and complaints is determined by law.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL FREEDOM AND RIGHTS

Art. 64

Everyone has the right to property, other property rights and the right to inherit.
Property, other property rights and the right of inheritance are subject to equal legal protection for all.
Property may be limited only by statute and only to the extent that it does not violate the essence of property rights.
Art. 65

Everyone is guaranteed the freedom to choose and pursue a profession and place of work. Exceptions are specified by law.
A work obligation can only be imposed by law.
The permanent employment of children under 16 is prohibited. The forms and nature of permissible employment are determined by law.
The minimum amount of remuneration for work or the method of determining this amount is specified by law.
Public authorities pursue a policy aimed at full, productive employment by implementing programs to combat unemployment, including organizing and supporting vocational guidance and training, as well as public works and intervention works.
Art. 66.

Everyone has the right to safe and hygienic working conditions. The manner of exercising this right and the obligations of the employer are specified in the Act.
The employee is entitled to days off from work and paid annual holidays specified in the law; maximum working time standards are specified by law.
Article 67

A citizen has the right to social security in the event of inability to work due to illness or disability and after reaching retirement age. The scope and forms of social security are determined by law.
A citizen who is unemployed involuntarily and has no other means of subsistence has the right to social security, the scope and forms of which are determined by law.
Article 68

Everyone has the right to health care.
Public authorities provide citizens, regardless of their financial situation, with equal access to health care services financed from public funds. The conditions and scope of providing benefits are specified by law.
Public authorities are obliged to provide special health care to children, pregnant women, disabled people and the elderly.
Public authorities are obliged to combat epidemic diseases and prevent the negative health effects of environmental degradation.
Public authorities support the development of physical culture, especially among children and young people.
Art. 69.

Public authorities provide disabled people with assistance, in accordance with the Act, in securing their existence, preparing for work and social communication.

Art. 70

Everyone has the right to education. Education is compulsory until the age of 18. The method of fulfilling compulsory school attendance is specified by law.
There is education in public schools
free. The Act may allow public higher education institutions to provide certain educational services for a fee.
Parents have the freedom to choose non-public schools for their children. Citizens and institutions have the right to establish primary, secondary and higher schools and educational institutions. The conditions for establishing and operating non-public schools and the participation of public authorities in their financing, as well as the principles of pedagogical supervision over schools and educational institutions, are determined by law.
Public authorities provide citizens with universal and equal access to education. For this purpose, they create and support systems of individual financial and organizational assistance for pupils and students. The conditions for providing assistance are specified by law.
The autonomy of higher education institutions is ensured on the terms specified in the Act.
Art. 71.

The state takes the good of the family into account in its social and economic policy. Families in a difficult financial and social situation, especially those with many children and single-parent families, have the right to special assistance from public authorities.
Before and after the birth of a child, a mother has the right to special assistance from public authorities, the scope of which is determined by law.
Art. 72.

The Republic of Poland ensures the protection of children's rights. Everyone has the right to demand that public authorities protect children against violence, cruelty, exploitation and demoralization.
A child deprived of parental care has the right to care and assistance from public authorities.
When determining the rights of a child, public authorities and persons responsible for the child are obliged to listen to the child's opinion and, if possible, take it into account.
The Act specifies the competences and method of appointing the Ombudsman for Children.
Art. 73.

Everyone is guaranteed freedom of artistic creation, scientific research and the publication of their results, freedom of teaching, and freedom to use cultural goods.

Art. 74.

Public authorities pursue policies that ensure ecological security for current and future generations.
Environmental protection is the responsibility of public authorities.
Everyone has the right to information about the condition and protection of the environment.
Public authorities support citizens' activities to protect and improve the environment.
Art. 75.

Public authorities pursue a policy that helps meet the housing needs of citizens, in particular counteracting homelessness, supporting the development of social housing and supporting citizens' actions aimed at obtaining their own apartment.
The protection of tenants' rights is defined by law.
Art. 76.

Public authorities protect consumers, users and tenants against activities that threaten their health, privacy and safety and against unfair market practices. The scope of this protection is determined by law.

MEASURES FOR PROTECTING FREEDOM AND RIGHTS

Art. 77.

Everyone has the right to compensation for damage caused to him by unlawful action of a public authority.
The Act cannot prevent anyone from going to court to pursue infringed freedoms or rights.
Art. 78.

Each party has the right to appeal against judgments and decisions issued in the first instance. Exceptions to this rule and the procedure for appealing are specified by law.

Art. 79.

Anyone whose constitutional freedoms or rights have been violated has the right, under the terms specified in the Act, to submit a complaint to the Constitutional Tribunal regarding the conformity with the Constitution of an act or other normative act on the basis of which a court or public administration body made a final decision on his freedoms or rights. or about his duties specified in the Constitution.
The provision of section 1 does not apply to the rights specified in Art. 56.
Art. 80

Everyone has the right, under the terms specified in the Act, to apply to the Commissioner for Human Rights for assistance in protecting their freedoms or rights violated by public authorities.

Art. 81.

The rights specified in Art. 65 section 4 and 5, art. 66, art. 69, art. 71 and art. 74-76 may be claimed within the limits specified in the Act.

DUTIES

Art. 82.

The duty of a Polish citizen is to be faithful to the Republic of Poland and to care for the common good.

Art. 83.

Everyone is obliged to comply with the law of the Republic of Poland.

Art. 84

Everyone is obliged to bear public burdens and benefits, including taxes, specified in the law.

Article 85

It is the duty of a Polish citizen to defend the Homeland.
The scope of compulsory military service is determined by law.
A citizen whose religious beliefs or moral principles do not allow him to perform military service may be obliged to perform alternative service under the terms specified in the Act.
Art. 86.

Everyone is obliged to take care of the environment and is responsible for its deterioration caused by them. The principles of this responsibility are defined by law.

Chapter III
SOURCES OF LAW

Art. 87.

The sources of generally applicable law of the Republic of Poland are: the Constitution, acts, ratified international agreements and regulations.
Sources of generally applicable law
in the Republic of Poland, there are acts of local law in the area of operation of the authorities that established them.
Article 88

The condition for the entry into force of acts, regulations and local legal acts is their publication.
The principles and procedure for announcing normative acts are specified in the Act.
International agreements ratified with prior consent expressed in law are announced in the manner required by law. The rules for announcing other international agreements are specified by law.
Art. 89.

Ratification of an international agreement by the Republic of Poland and its denunciation requires prior consent expressed in the Act if the agreement concerns:
1) peace, alliances, political arrangements or military arrangements,

2) civil liberties, rights and obligations specified in the Constitution,

3) membership of the Republic of Poland in an international organization,

4) significant financial burden on the state,

5) matters regulated by law or in which the Constitution requires an act.

The Prime Minister shall notify the Sejm of the intention to submit to the President of the Republic of Poland for ratification international agreements whose ratification does not require the consent expressed in the Act.
The principles and procedure for concluding, ratifying and terminating international agreements are specified in the Act.
Article 90

The Republic of Poland may, on the basis of an international agreement, transfer the competences of state authorities in certain matters to an international organization or international body.
An act expressing consent to ratification of the international agreement referred to in section 1, shall be adopted by the Sejm by a 2/3 majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies and by the Senate by a 2/3 majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of senators.
Consent to the ratification of such an agreement may be adopted in a nationwide referendum in accordance with the provisions of Art. 125.
The resolution on the choice of the mode of expressing consent to ratification is adopted by the Sejm by an absolute majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies.
Art. 91.

A ratified international agreement, after its publication in the Journal of Laws of the Republic of Poland, constitutes part of the national legal order and is directly applicable, unless its application depends on the issuance of an act.
An international agreement ratified with prior consent expressed in law takes precedence over the law if the law cannot be reconciled with the agreement.
If this results from the agreement constituting an international organization ratified by the Republic of Poland, the law established by it shall be applied directly, taking precedence in the event of a conflict with statutes.
Art. 92.

Regulations are issued by the bodies indicated in the Constitution, on the basis of detailed authorization contained in the Act and for the purpose of its implementation. The authorization should specify the authority competent to issue the regulation and the scope of matters submitted for regulation, as well as guidelines regarding the content of the act.
The body authorized to issue a regulation cannot delegate its competences referred to in section 1, to another authority.
Art. 93.

Resolutions of the Council of Ministers and orders of the Prime Minister and ministers are internal and apply only to organizational units subordinate to the body issuing these acts.
Orders are issued only on the basis of the Act. They cannot constitute the basis for decisions towards citizens, legal persons or other entities.
Resolutions and orders are subject to inspection as to their compliance with generally applicable law.
Art. 94

Local government bodies and local government administration bodies, on the basis and within the limits of the authorizations contained in the Act, establish local legal acts applicable in the area of operation of these bodies. The principles and procedure for issuing local legal acts are specified in the Act.

Chapter IV
SEJM AND SENATE

Article 95

Legislative power in the Republic of Poland is exercised by the Sejm and the Senate.
The Sejm exercises control over the activities of the Council of Ministers within the scope specified in the provisions of the Constitution and laws.
ELECTIONS AND TERM

Art. 96.

The Sejm consists of 460 deputies.
Elections to the Sejm are universal, equal, direct and proportional and take place in a secret ballot.
Article 97

The Senate consists of 100 senators.
Elections to the Senate are universal, direct and take place by secret ballot.
Article 98

The Sejm and Senate are elected for four-year terms. The terms of office of the Sejm and Senate begin on the day of the assembly of the Sejm for its first session and last until the day preceding the day of the meeting of the Sejm of the next term.
Elections to the Sejm and Senate are ordered by the President of the Republic of Poland no later than 90 days before the expiry of 4 years from the beginning of the term of office of the Sejm and Senate, setting the elections on a day off from work, falling within 30 days before the expiry of 4 years from the beginning of the term of office of the Sejm and Senate.
The Sejm may shorten its term of office by a resolution adopted by a majority of at least 2/3 of the votes of the statutory number of Deputies. Shortening the term of office of the Sejm means simultaneously shortening the term of office of the Senate. Recipe
paragraph 5 shall apply accordingly.
The President of the Republic of Poland, after seeking the opinion of the Speaker of the Sejm and the Speaker of the Senate, may, in the cases specified in the Constitution, order the shortening of the term of office of the Sejm. With the shortening of the term of office of the Sejm, the term of office of the Senate is also shortened.
When ordering the shortening of the term of office of the Sejm, the President of the Republic of Poland also orders elections to the Sejm and the Senate and sets their date to fall no later than within 45 days from the date of ordering the shortening of the term of office of the Sejm. The President of the Republic of Poland convenes the first meeting of the newly elected Sejm no later than the 15th day after the election date.
In the event of a shortening of the term of office of the Sejm, the provisions of section. 1.
Art. 99.

A Polish citizen with the right to vote who turns 21 on election day at the latest may be elected to the Sejm.
A Polish citizen with the right to vote who turns 30 on election day at the latest may be elected to the Senate.
A person who has been sentenced by a final judgment to imprisonment for an intentional crime prosecuted by public prosecution cannot be elected to the Sejm or the Senate.
Art. 100

Candidates for deputies and senators may be nominated by political parties and voters.
You cannot run for the Sejm and Senate at the same time.
The rules and procedure for nominating candidates and conducting elections, as well as the conditions for the validity of elections, are specified by law.
Art. 101.

The validity of elections to the Sejm and Senate is confirmed by the Supreme Court.
The voter has the right to submit a protest to the Supreme Court against the validity of the elections under the terms specified in the Act.
MEMBERS AND SENATORS

Art. 102.

You cannot be an MP and a senator at the same time.

Art. 103.

The mandate of an MP cannot be combined with the functions of the President of the National Bank of Poland, the President of the Supreme Audit Office, the Ombudsman, the Ombudsman for Children and their deputies, a member of the Monetary Policy Council, a member of the National Broadcasting Council, an ambassador or with employment in the Chancellery of the Sejm or the Chancellery of the Senate. , Chancellery of the President of the Republic of Poland or with employment in government administration. This prohibition does not apply to members of the Council of Ministers and secretaries of state in government administration.
A judge, prosecutor, civil servant, soldier in active military service, police officer and state security officer cannot hold a parliamentary mandate.
Other cases of the prohibition of combining a parliamentary mandate with public functions and the prohibition of holding such a mandate may be determined by law.
Art. 104

MPs are representatives of the Nation. They are not bound by voters' instructions.
Before taking up their mandate, Members of Parliament take the following oath before the Sejm:
"I solemnly vow to honestly and conscientiously perform my duties towards the Nation, protect the sovereignty and interests of the State, do everything for the prosperity of the Homeland and the good of its citizens, and obey the Constitution and other laws of the Republic of Poland."
The oath may be taken with the addition of the phrase "So help me God."

Refusal to take the oath means relinquishing the mandate.
Art. 105.

A Member of Parliament cannot be held liable for his/her activities falling within the scope of exercising his/her parliamentary mandate, either during its term or after its expiry. A Member of Parliament is responsible for such activities only before the Sejm, and in the event of violating the rights of third parties, he or she may be held liable in court only with the consent of the Sejm.
From the date of announcement of the election results to the date of expiry of the mandate, a Member of Parliament cannot be held criminally liable without the consent of the Sejm.
Criminal proceedings initiated against a person before the date of his/her election as a deputy shall be suspended, at the request of the Sejm, until the mandate expires. In such a case, the limitation period in criminal proceedings is also suspended for this period.
A Member of Parliament may consent to being held criminally liable. In such a case, the provisions of section 2 and 3.
A Member of Parliament may not be detained or arrested without the consent of the Sejm, except when he is caught in the act of committing a crime and if his detention is necessary to ensure the proper course of proceedings. The Marshal of the Sejm is immediately notified of the detention, who may order the immediate release of the detainee.
Detailed rules for holding Members of Parliament criminally liable and the procedure are specified in the Act.
Art. 106.

The conditions necessary for the effective fulfillment of parliamentary duties and the protection of rights resulting from the exercise of the mandate are defined by law.

Art. 107.

To the extent specified in the Act, a Member of Parliament may not conduct business activities obtaining benefits from the assets of the State Treasury or local government, nor may they acquire such assets.
For violating the prohibitions referred to in section 1, a Member of Parliament, by a resolution of the Sejm adopted at the request of the Speaker of the Sejm, may be held liable before the State Tribunal, which shall rule on the deprivation of the mandate.
Art. 108.

The provisions of Art. shall apply accordingly to senators. 103-107.

ORGANIZATION AND OPERATIONS
E

Art. 109.

The Sejm and Senate hold sessions.
The President of the Republic of Poland convenes the first sessions of the Sejm and Senate on a day falling within 30 days of the election day, except for the cases specified in Art. 98 section 3 and 5.
Art. 110

The Sejm elects the Speaker of the Sejm and deputy speakers from among its members.
The Marshal of the Sejm chairs the proceedings of the Sejm, protects the rights of the Sejm and represents the Sejm externally.
The Sejm appoints permanent committees and may appoint extraordinary committees.
Art. 111.

The Sejm may appoint an investigative commission to investigate a specific matter.
The mode of operation of the investigative commission is determined by law.
Art. 112.

The internal organization and order of work of the Sejm and the procedure for appointing and operating its bodies, as well as the manner of performing constitutional and statutory obligations of state bodies towards the Sejm, are determined by the regulations of the Sejm adopted by the Sejm.

Art. 113.

The sessions of the Sejm are public. If the good of the state so requires, the Sejm may, by an absolute majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies, decide to hold the proceedings in secret.

Art. 114.

In the cases specified in the Constitution, the Sejm and the Senate, sitting jointly under the chairmanship of the Speaker of the Sejm or, in his or her stead, the Marshal of the Senate, act as the National Assembly.
The National Assembly adopts its regulations.
Art. 115.

The Prime Minister and other members of the Council of Ministers are obliged to respond to parliamentary interpellations and questions within 21 days.
The Prime Minister and other members of the Council of Ministers are obliged to provide answers on current matters at each session of the Sejm.
Art. 116.

The Sejm decides on the state of war and the conclusion of peace on behalf of the Republic of Poland.
The Sejm may adopt a resolution on a state of war only in the event of an armed attack on the territory of the Republic of Poland or when international agreements provide for an obligation to jointly defend against aggression. If the Sejm cannot convene for a session, the President of the Republic decides on the state of war.
Art. 117.

The rules for the use of the Armed Forces outside the borders of the Republic of Poland are specified in a ratified international agreement or act. The rules for the stay of foreign troops on the territory of the Republic of Poland and the rules for their movement through this territory are specified in ratified international agreements or laws.

Art. 118.

Legislative initiative is vested in the Members of Parliament, the Senate, the President of the Republic of Poland and the Council of Ministers.
Legislative initiative is also vested in a group of at least 100,000 citizens with the right to vote in the Sejm. The procedure in this matter is determined by law.
When submitting a draft bill to the Sejm, applicants present the financial consequences of its implementation.
Art. 119.

The Sejm considers the bill in three readings.
The right to submit amendments to the bill while it is being considered by the Sejm is vested in the proposer of the bill, the Members of Parliament and the Council of Ministers.
The Marshal of the Sejm may refuse to put to a vote an amendment that has not previously been submitted to the committee.
The applicant may withdraw a bill during the legislative proceedings in the Sejm until the second reading of the bill is completed.
Art. 120.

The Sejm adopts laws by a simple majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies, unless the Constitution provides for a different majority. The Sejm adopts resolutions in the same manner, unless an act or a resolution of the Sejm provides otherwise.

Art. 121.

The Act passed by the Sejm shall be forwarded by the Marshal of the Sejm to the Senate.
Within 30 days from the date of submission of the act, the Senate may adopt it without changes, adopt amendments or reject it in its entirety. If the Senate does not adopt an appropriate resolution within 30 days from the date of submission of the act, the act shall be deemed adopted in the wording adopted by the Sejm.
A resolution of the Senate rejecting a bill or an amendment proposed in a resolution of the Senate shall be deemed adopted if the Sejm does not reject it by an absolute majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies.
Art. 122.

After completing the proceedings specified in Art. 121 The Marshal of the Sejm presents the adopted act for signature to the President of the Republic of Poland.
The President of the Republic of Poland signs the act within 21 days from the date of presentation and orders its publication in the Journal of Laws of the Republic of Poland.
Before signing the act, the President of the Republic of Poland may submit a request to the Constitutional Tribunal regarding the compliance of the act with the Constitution. The President of the Republic of Poland cannot refuse to sign an act that the Constitutional Tribunal has found consistent with the Constitution.
The President of the Republic of Poland refuses to sign an act that the Constitutional Tribunal found inconsistent with the Constitution. However, if the inconsistency with the Constitution concerns individual provisions of the act, and the Constitutional Tribunal does not rule that they are inextricably linked to the entire act, the President of the Republic of Poland, after seeking the opinion of the Marshal of the Sejm, signs the act, omitting the provisions found to be inconsistent with the Constitution, or returns the paragraph.
law to the Sejm in order to remove any inconsistencies.
If the President of the Republic of Poland has not submitted an application to the Constitutional Tribunal pursuant to section 3, may, with a reasoned request, refer the bill to the Sejm for reconsideration. After the Sejm passes the act again by a 3/5 majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies, the President of the Republic of Poland signs the act within 7 days and orders its publication in the Journal of Laws of the Republic of Poland. If the Sejm passes the act again, the President of the Republic of Poland shall not have the right to appeal to the Constitutional Tribunal in accordance with section 3.
The submission of the President of the Republic of Poland to the Constitutional Tribunal with a request regarding the conformity of an act with the Constitution or with a request to the Sejm to reconsider the act suspends the course specified in section 2, the deadline for signing the act.
Art. 123.

The Council of Ministers may consider a draft act adopted by it to be urgent, with the exception of draft tax acts, acts relating to the election of the President of the Republic of Poland, the Sejm, the Senate and local government bodies, acts regulating the system and competences of public authorities, as well as codes.
The Rules of Procedure of the Sejm and the Rules of Procedure of the Senate specify the differences in legislative proceedings regarding an urgent bill.
In proceedings regarding a bill whose draft is deemed urgent, the deadline for its consideration by the Senate is 14 days, and the deadline for signing the bill by the President of the Republic of Poland is 7 days.
Art. 124.

The provisions of Art. shall apply accordingly to the Senate. 110, art. 112, art. 113 and art. 120.

REFERENDUM

Art. 125.

A nationwide referendum may be held on matters of particular importance to the state.
The Sejm has the right to order a national referendum by an absolute majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of deputies, or by the President of the Republic of Poland with the consent of the Senate expressed by an absolute majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of senators.
If more than half of those entitled to vote took part in the national referendum, the referendum result is binding.
Validity of the national referendum and the referendum referred to in Art. 235 section 6, states the Supreme Court.
The rules and procedure for conducting a referendum are specified by law.

Chapter V
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND

Art. 126.

The President of the Republic of Poland is the highest representative of the Republic of Poland and the guarantor of the continuity of state power.
The President of the Republic of Poland ensures compliance with the Constitution, safeguards the sovereignty and security of the state as well as the inviolability and indivisibility of its territory.
The President of the Republic of Poland performs his tasks within the scope and on the principles specified in the Constitution and laws.
Art. 127.

The President of the Republic of Poland is elected by the Nation in universal, equal and direct elections and by secret ballot.
The President of the Republic of Poland is elected for a five-year term and may be re-elected only once.
A Polish citizen who is 35 years old on election day at the latest and has full voting rights to the Sejm may be elected President of the Republic of Poland. A candidate is nominated by at least 100,000 citizens who have the right to vote in the Sejm.
The candidate who receives more than half of the valid votes cast is elected President of the Republic of Poland. If none of the candidates obtains the required majority, another vote is held on the fourteenth day after the first vote.
In the second ballot, the election is made from among the two candidates who received the highest number of votes in the first ballot. If either of these two candidates withdraws consent to stand, loses the right to vote or dies, the candidate who received the highest number of votes in the first ballot is eligible to be elected in his place. In such a case, the date of re-voting is postponed for a further 14 days.
The candidate who receives more votes in the repeated vote is elected President of the Republic of Poland.
The rules and procedure for nominating candidates and conducting elections, as well as the conditions for the validity of the election of the President of the Republic of Poland, are specified by law.
Art. 128.

The term of office of the President of the Republic of Poland begins on the day he takes office.
The election of the President of the Republic of Poland is ordered by the Marshal of the Sejm on a day falling no earlier than 100 days and no later than 75 days before the expiry of the term of office of the incumbent President of the Republic of Poland, and in the event of the office of President of the Republic of Poland becoming vacant - no later than the fourteenth day after the office becomes vacant, setting the date of the election on a day off from work falling within 60 days from the date of the election.
Art. 129.

The validity of the election of the President of the Republic of Poland is confirmed by the Supreme Court.
The voter has the right to submit a protest to the Supreme Court against the validity of the election of the President of the Republic of Poland on the terms specified in the Act.
In case of findings
If the election of the President of the Republic is invalidated, new elections shall be held in accordance with the principles provided for in Art. 128 section 2 in the event of the vacancy of the office of the President of the Republic of Poland.
Art. 130.

The President of the Republic of Poland takes office after taking the following oath before the National Assembly:

"Assuming, by the will of the Nation, the office of President of the Republic of Poland, I solemnly swear that I will be faithful to the provisions of the Constitution, I will steadfastly protect the dignity of the Nation, the independence and security of the State, and the good of the Homeland and the prosperity of its citizens will always be my highest imperative."

The oath may be taken with the addition of the phrase "So help me God."

Art. 131.

If the President of the Republic of Poland is temporarily unable to hold office, he or she shall notify the Marshal of the Sejm, who will temporarily take over the duties of the President of the Republic of Poland. If the President of the Republic of Poland is unable to notify the Marshal of the Sejm of his inability to hold office, the Constitutional Tribunal shall decide on the finding of an impediment to the President of the Republic of Poland at the request of the Speaker of the Sejm. If it is recognized that the President of the Republic of Poland is temporarily unable to hold office, the Constitutional Tribunal entrusts the Marshal of the Sejm with the temporary performance of the duties of the President of the Republic of Poland.
The Marshal of the Sejm temporarily, until the election of the new President of the Republic of Poland, performs the duties of the President of the Republic of Poland in the event of:
1) death of the President of the Republic of Poland,

2) resignation of office by the President of the Republic of Poland,

3) declaring the election of the President of the Republic of Poland invalid or other reasons for not taking up office after being elected,

4) recognition by the National Assembly of the permanent inability of the President of the Republic of Poland to hold office due to his health condition, by a resolution adopted by a majority of at least 2/3 of the votes of the statutory number of members of the National Assembly,

5) removal of the President of the Republic of Poland by a decision of the State Tribunal.

If the Marshal of the Sejm cannot perform the duties of the President of the Republic of Poland, these duties shall be taken over by the Marshal of the Senate.
A person performing the duties of the President of the Republic of Poland may not decide to shorten the term of office of the Sejm.
Art. 132.

The President of the Republic of Poland may not hold any other office or perform any public function, except for those related to the office held.

Art. 133.

The President of the Republic of Poland as a representative of the state in external relations:
1) ratifies and denounces international agreements, of which he notifies the Sejm and the Senate,

2) appoints and dismisses plenipotentiary representatives of the Republic of Poland in other countries and international organizations,

3) accepts letters of credentials and recalls of diplomatic representatives of other countries and international organizations accredited to him.

Before ratifying an international agreement, the President of the Republic of Poland may apply to the Constitutional Tribunal regarding its compliance with the Constitution.
The President of the Republic of Poland cooperates with the Prime Minister and the relevant minister in the field of foreign policy.
Art. 134.

The President of the Republic of Poland is the supreme commander of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland.
In times of peace, the President of the Republic of Poland exercises authority over the Armed Forces through the Minister of National Defense.
The President of the Republic of Poland appoints the Chief of the General Staff and commanders of the Armed Forces for a specified period. The duration of the term of office, the procedure and conditions for dismissal before its expiry are determined by law.
For the duration of the war, the President of the Republic of Poland, at the request of the Prime Minister, appoints the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. In the same procedure, he may dismiss the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. The competences of the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces and the principles of his subordination to the constitutional bodies of the Republic of Poland are determined by law.
The President of the Republic of Poland, at the request of the Minister of National Defense, awards military ranks specified in laws.
The competences of the President of the Republic of Poland related to the authority over the Armed Forces are specified in detail by law.
Art. 135.

The National Security Council is the advisory body to the President of the Republic of Poland in the field of internal and external security of the state.

Art. 136.

In the event of a direct, external threat to the state, the President of the Republic of Poland, at the request of the Prime Minister, orders general or partial mobilization and use of the Armed Forces to defend the Republic of Poland.

Art. 137.

The President of the Republic of Poland grants Polish citizenship and consents to the renunciation of Polish citizenship.

Art. 138.

The President of the Republic of Poland awards orders and decorations.

Art. 139.

The President of the Republic of Poland applies the law of pardon. The law of pardon does not apply to persons sentenced by the State Tribunal.

Art. 140.

The President of the Republic of Poland may address a message to the Sejm, the Senate or the National Assembly. The messages do not
becomes the subject of debate.

Art. 141.

In matters of particular importance, the President of the Republic of Poland may convene the Cabinet Council. The Cabinet Council is formed by the Council of Ministers chaired by the President of the Republic of Poland.
The Cabinet Council does not have the powers of the Council of Ministers.
Art. 142.

The President of the Republic of Poland issues regulations and orders pursuant to the principles set out in Art. 92 and art. 93.
The President of the Republic of Poland issues decisions regarding the implementation of his remaining competences.
Art. 143.

The Chancellery of the President of the Republic of Poland is an auxiliary body of the President of the Republic of Poland. The President of the Republic of Poland issues the statute of the Chancellery and appoints and dismisses the Head of the Chancellery of the President of the Republic of Poland.

Art. 144.

The President of the Republic of Poland, using his constitutional and statutory powers, issues official acts.
For their validity, official acts of the President of the Republic of Poland require the signature of the Prime Minister, who, by signing the act, is responsible to the Sejm.
The provision of section 2 not applicable:
1) managing elections to the Sejm and Senate,

2) convening the first meeting of the newly elected Sejm and Senate,

3) shortening the term of office of the Sejm in the cases specified in the Constitution,

4) legislative initiative,

5) administering a national referendum,

6) signing or refusing to sign the act,

7) managing the publication of an act and an international agreement in the Journal of Laws of the Republic of Poland,

8) address a message to the Sejm, the Senate or the National Assembly,

9) application to the Constitutional Tribunal,

10) application for an inspection by the Supreme Audit Office,

11) designating and appointing the Prime Minister,

12) accepting the resignation of the Council of Ministers and entrusting it with temporary duties,

13) a motion to the Sejm to hold a member of the Council of Ministers accountable before the Tribunal of State,

14) dismissing a minister in whom the Sejm expressed a vote of no confidence,

15) convening the Cabinet Council,

16) awarding orders and decorations,

17) appointing judges,

18) application of the law of grace,

19) granting Polish citizenship and consenting to renounce Polish citizenship,

20) appointing the First President of the Supreme Court,

21) appointing the President and Vice-President of the Constitutional Tribunal,

22) appointing the President of the Supreme Administrative Court,

23) appointing the presidents of the Supreme Court and vice-presidents of the Supreme Administrative Court,

24) a motion to the Sejm to appoint the President of the National Bank of Poland,

25) appointing members of the Monetary Policy Council,

26) appointing and dismissing members of the National Security Council,

27) appointing members of the National Broadcasting Council,

28) granting a statute to the Chancellery of the President of the Republic of Poland and appointing and dismissing the Head of the Chancellery of the President of the Republic of Poland,

29) issuing orders under the principles specified in Art. 93,

30) resignation from the office of the President of the Republic of Poland.

Art. 145.

The President of the Republic of Poland may be held liable before the State Tribunal for violating the Constitution, statute or committing a crime.
The President of the Republic of Poland may be impeached by a resolution of the National Assembly adopted by a majority of at least 2/3 of the votes of the statutory number of members of the National Assembly at the request of at least 140 members of the National Assembly.
On the day of adopting the resolution to impeach the President of the Republic of Poland before the State Tribunal, the holding of office by the President of the Republic of Poland is suspended. The provision of Art. 131 shall apply accordingly.

Chapter VI
COUNCIL OF MINISTERS AND GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION

Art. 146.

The Council of Ministers conducts the internal and foreign policy of the Republic of Poland.
The Council of Ministers is responsible for matters of state policy not reserved for other state bodies and local government.
The Council of Ministers manages the government administration.
To the extent and under the principles specified in the Constitution and acts, the Council of Ministers, in particular:
1) ensures the implementation of laws,

2) issues regulations,

3) coordinates and controls the work of government administration bodies,

4) protects the interests of the State Treasury,

5) adopts the draft state budget,

6) manages the implementation of the state budget and adopts the closure of state accounts and the report on the implementation of the budget,

7) ensures the internal security of the state and public order,

8) ensures the external security of the state,

9) exercises general management in the field of relations with other countries and international organizations,

10) concludes international agreements requiring ratification and approves and denounces other international agreements,

11) exercises general management in the field of national defense and determines annually the number of citizens called up for active military service,

12) determines the organization and mode of its work.

Art. 147.

The Council of Ministers consists of the Prime Minister and ministers.
Member of the Mini Council
Vice-Presidents of the Council of Ministers may be appointed.
The President and Vice-President of the Council of Ministers may also serve as a minister.
Chairmen of committees specified in laws may also be appointed to the Council of Ministers.
Art. 148.

Prime Minister:

represents the Council of Ministers,
directs the work of the Council of Ministers,
issues regulations,
ensures the implementation of the policy of the Council of Ministers and determines the methods of its implementation,
coordinates and controls the work of members of the Council of Ministers,
supervises local government within the limits and forms specified in the Constitution and laws,
is the official superior of government administration employees.
Art. 149.

Ministers manage specific departments of government administration or fulfill tasks assigned to them by the Prime Minister. The scope of activities of the minister in charge of a government administration department is determined by statute.
The minister in charge of the government administration department issues regulations. The Council of Ministers, at the request of the Prime Minister, may repeal the regulation or order of the minister.
To the chairman of the committee referred to in Art. 147 section 4, the provisions relating to the minister in charge of the government administration department shall apply accordingly.
Art. 150.

A member of the Council of Ministers may not conduct activities contrary to his public duties.

Art. 151.

The Prime Minister, vice-presidents of the Council of Ministers and ministers take the following oath before the President of the Republic of Poland:

"Assuming the office of Prime Minister (Vice-President of the Council of Ministers, Minister), I solemnly swear that I will be faithful to the provisions of the Constitution and other laws of the Republic of Poland, and the good of the Homeland and the prosperity of its citizens will always be my highest imperative."

The oath may be taken with the addition of the phrase "So help me God."

Art. 152.

The representative of the Council of Ministers in the voivodeship is the voivode.
The procedure for appointing and dismissing as well as the scope of activities of voivodes are determined by law.
Art. 153.

In order to ensure professional, reliable, impartial and politically neutral performance of state tasks, the civil service corps operates in government administration offices.
The Prime Minister is the head of the civil service corps.
Art. 154.

The President of the Republic of Poland designates the Prime Minister, who proposes the composition of the Council of Ministers. The President of the Republic of Poland appoints the Prime Minister together with the other members of the Council of Ministers within 14 days from the date of the first sitting of the Sejm or the acceptance of the resignation of the previous Council of Ministers and takes the oath from the members of the newly appointed Council of Ministers.
The Prime Minister, within 14 days from the date of appointment by the President of the Republic of Poland, presents to the Sejm the program of activities of the Council of Ministers with a request for a vote of confidence. The Sejm passes a vote of confidence by an absolute majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies.
In the event of failure to appoint the Council of Ministers pursuant to section 1 or failure to grant it a vote of confidence in accordance with section 2 The Sejm within 14 days from the expiry of the deadlines specified in section 1 or section 2 elects the Prime Minister and the members of the Council of Ministers proposed by him by an absolute majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies. The President of the Republic of Poland appoints the Council of Ministers so elected and takes the oath from its members.
Art. 155.

In the event of failure to appoint the Council of Ministers pursuant to Art. 154 section 3 The President of the Republic of Poland, within 14 days, appoints the Prime Minister and, at his request, the remaining members of the Council of Ministers and takes their oath. Within 14 days from the date of appointment of the Council of Ministers by the President of the Republic of Poland, the Sejm shall grant it a vote of confidence by a majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies.
In the event of failure to grant a vote of confidence to the Council of Ministers in the manner specified in section 1, the President of the Republic of Poland shortens the term of office of the Sejm and orders elections.
Art. 156.

Members of the Council of Ministers are liable before the Tribunal of State for violations of the Constitution or laws, as well as for crimes committed in connection with their position.
The resolution to hold a member of the Council of Ministers liable before the State Tribunal is adopted by the Sejm at the request of the President of the Republic of Poland or at least 115 deputies by a majority of 3/5 of the statutory number of deputies.
Art. 157.

Members of the Council of Ministers are jointly and severally liable to the Sejm for the activities of the Council of Ministers.
Members of the Council of Ministers are also individually responsible to the Sejm for matters falling within their competences or entrusted to them by the Prime Minister.
Art. 158.

The Sejm expresses a vote of no confidence in the Council of Ministers by a majority of the statutory number of Deputies upon a motion submitted by at least 46 Deputies and naming the candidate for the Prime Minister. If the resolution has been adopted by the Sejm, the President of the Republic of Poland accepts the resignation of the Council of Ministers and appoints a new Prime Minister elected by the Sejm, and on his position
request of the remaining members of the Council of Ministers and takes their oath.
Motion to adopt the resolution referred to in section 1 may be put to a vote no earlier than 7 days from the date of its submission. A repeat application may be submitted no earlier than 3 months from the date of submission of the previous application. A repeat motion may be submitted before the expiry of 3 months if it is submitted by at least 115 Members of Parliament.
Art. 159.

The Sejm may express a vote of no confidence in the minister. A motion to express a vote of no confidence may be submitted by at least 69 MPs. The provision of Art. 158 section 2 shall apply accordingly.
The President of the Republic of Poland dismisses a minister in whom the Sejm has expressed a vote of no confidence by a majority of the votes of the statutory number of Deputies.
Art. 160.

The Prime Minister may request the Sejm to express a vote of confidence in the Council of Ministers. A vote of confidence in the Council of Ministers is granted by a majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of deputies.

Art. 161.

The President of the Republic of Poland, at the request of the Prime Minister, changes the composition of the Council of Ministers.

Art. 162.

The Prime Minister submits the resignation of the Council of Ministers at the first meeting of the newly elected Sejm.
The Prime Minister also submits the resignation of the Council of Ministers in the event of:
1) failure of the Sejm to adopt a vote of confidence in the Council of Ministers,

2) expressing a vote of no confidence in the Council of Ministers,

3) resignation of the Prime Minister.

The President of the Republic of Poland, accepting the resignation of the Council of Ministers, entrusts it to continue performing its duties until a new Council of Ministers is appointed.
The President of the Republic of Poland, in the case specified in section 2 point 3, may refuse to accept the resignation of the Council of Ministers.

Chapter VII
TERRITORIAL GOVERNMENT

Art. 163.

The local government performs public tasks not reserved by the Constitution or laws for bodies of other public authorities.

Art. 164.

The basic unit of local government is the commune.
Other units of regional or local and regional self-government are specified by law.
The commune performs all tasks of local government not reserved for other local government units.
Art. 165.

Local government units have legal personality. They are entitled to ownership and other property rights.
The independence of local government units is subject to judicial protection.
Art. 166.

Public tasks serving to meet the needs of the local government community are performed by the local government unit as its own tasks.
If it results from the justified needs of the state, the act may commission local government units to perform other public tasks. The Act specifies the procedure for transferring and performing the assigned tasks.
Competence disputes between local government and government administration bodies are resolved by administrative courts.
Art. 167.

Local government units are provided with a share in public revenues appropriate to their tasks.
The revenues of local government units are their own revenues and general subsidies and targeted subsidies from the state budget.
The sources of income of local government units are specified in the Act.
Changes in the scope of tasks and competences of local government units occur along with appropriate changes in the division of public revenues.
Art. 168.

Local government units have the right to determine the amount of local taxes and fees within the scope specified in the Act.

Art. 169.

Local government units perform their tasks through legislative and executive bodies.
Elections to decision-making bodies are universal, equal, direct and take place in a secret ballot. The rules and procedure for nominating candidates and conducting elections, as well as the conditions for the validity of elections, are specified by law.
The rules and procedures for electing and dismissing executive bodies of local government units are specified by law.
The internal structure of local government units is determined, within the limits of statutes, by their decision-making bodies.
Art. 170.

Members of a local government community may decide, by way of a referendum, on matters relating to this community, including the dismissal of a directly elected local government body. The rules and procedure for conducting a local referendum are specified by law.

Art. 171.

The activities of local government are subject to supervision from the point of view of legality.
The bodies supervising the activities of local government units are the Prime Minister and voivodes, and in the field of financial matters, the regional chambers of audit.
The Sejm, at the request of the Prime Minister, may dissolve a decision-making body of local government if this body grossly violates the Constitution or laws.
Art. 172.

Local government units have the right to associate.
A local government unit has the right to join international associations of local and regional communities and cooperate with local and regional communities of other countries.
Rules, on
which local government units can exercise the rights referred to in section 1 and 2, shall be specified by law.

Chapter VIII
COURTS AND TRIBUNALS

Art. 173.

Courts and Tribunals are a separate and independent authority from other authorities.

Art. 174.

Courts and Tribunals issue judgments on behalf of the Republic of Poland.

COURTS

Art. 175.

The administration of justice in the Republic of Poland is administered by the Supreme Court, common courts, administrative courts and military courts.
An exceptional court or summary procedure may be established only for the duration of war.
Art. 176.

Court proceedings involve at least two instances.
The structure and jurisdiction of the courts as well as the proceedings before the courts are determined by statute.
Art. 177.

Common courts administer justice in all matters, except matters reserved by law for the jurisdiction of other courts.

Art. 178.

Judges are independent in exercising their office and are subject only to the Constitution and laws.
Judges are provided with working conditions and remuneration commensurate with the dignity of the office and the scope of their duties.
A judge may not belong to a political party, trade union or conduct public activities that are incompatible with the principles of independence of courts and judges.
Art. 179.

Judges are appointed by the President of the Republic of Poland, at the request of the National Council of the Judiciary, for an indefinite period.

Art. 180.

Judges are irremovable.
A judge may be removed from office, suspended from office, or transferred to another seat or position against his or her will only by virtue of a court decision and only in the cases specified in the Act.
A judge may be retired due to illness or loss of strength that prevents him from performing his duties. The procedure and the method of appealing to the court are specified by law.
The act specifies the age at which judges retire.
In the event of a change in the court system or changes in the boundaries of judicial districts, a judge may be transferred to another court or retired while retaining his full salary.
Art. 181.

A judge may not be held criminally liable or deprived of liberty without the prior consent of the court specified by law. A judge may not be detained or arrested, except when he is caught in the act of committing a crime, if his detention is necessary to ensure the proper course of the proceedings. The president of the locally competent court is immediately notified of the detention, who may order the immediate release of the detainee.

Art. 182.

Citizens' participation in the administration of justice is determined by law.

Art. 183.

The Supreme Court supervises the activities of common and military courts in the field of adjudication.
The Supreme Court also performs other activities specified in the Constitution and statutes.
The First President of the Supreme Court is appointed by the President of the Republic of Poland for a six-year term of office from among candidates presented by the General Assembly of Supreme Court Judges.
Art. 184.

The Supreme Administrative Court and other administrative courts supervise the activities of public administration, to the extent specified in the Act. This control also includes adjudicating on the compliance of resolutions of local government bodies and normative acts of local government administration bodies with the laws.

Art. 185.

The President of the Supreme Administrative Court is appointed by the President of the Republic of Poland for a six-year term of office from among the candidates presented by the General Assembly of Judges of the Supreme Administrative Court.

Art. 186.

The National Council of the Judiciary safeguards the independence of courts and judges.
The National Council of the Judiciary may submit a request to the Constitutional Tribunal regarding the conformity of normative acts with the Constitution to the extent that they concern the independence of courts and judges.
Art. 187.

The National Council of the Judiciary consists of:
1) The First President of the Supreme Court, the Minister of Justice, the President of the Supreme Administrative Court and a person appointed by the President of the Republic of Poland,

2) fifteen members elected from among judges of the Supreme Court, common courts, administrative courts and military courts,

3) four members elected by the Sejm from among its Deputies and two members elected by the Senate from among senators.

The National Council of the Judiciary elects a chairman and two vice-chairmen from among its members.
The term of office of elected members of the National Council of the Judiciary is four years.
The structure, scope of activity and mode of operation of the National Council of the Judiciary as well as the method of electing its members are determined by law.
CONSTITUTIONAL COURT

Art. 188.

The Constitutional Tribunal rules on:

compliance of international laws and agreements with the Constitution,
compliance of acts with ratified international agreements, the ratification of which required prior consent expressed in the act,
compliance of legal provisions issued by central state bodies with the Constitution, ratified international agreements and laws,
compatibility
those with the Constitution, the goals or activities of political parties,
constitutional complaint referred to in Art. 79 section 1.
Art. 189.

The Constitutional Tribunal resolves disputes over competences between the central constitutional bodies of the state.

Art. 190.

The judgments of the Constitutional Tribunal have universally binding force and are final.
Judgments of the Constitutional Tribunal in matters listed in Art. 188 shall be immediately announced in the official body in which the normative act was announced. If the act has not been published, the judgment is published in the Official Journal of the Republic of Poland "Monitor Polski".
The judgment of the Constitutional Tribunal enters into force on the day of its announcement, however, the Constitutional Tribunal may specify a different date for the loss of binding force of the normative act. This period may not exceed eighteen months in the case of an act, and twelve months in the case of another normative act. In the case of judgments that involve financial outlays not provided for in the Budget Act, the Constitutional Tribunal determines the date of the expiry of the binding force of the normative act after hearing the opinion of the Council of Ministers.
A ruling of the Constitutional Tribunal on the non-compliance with the Constitution, an international agreement or an act of law of a normative act on the basis of which a final court ruling, a final administrative decision or a resolution in other matters was issued, constitutes the basis for resuming the proceedings, repealing the decision or other resolution on the terms and in the manner specified. in the provisions applicable to a given procedure.
Judgments of the Constitutional Tribunal are made by a majority of votes.
Art. 191.

With an application in matters referred to in Art. 188, the following may apply to the Constitutional Tribunal:
1) President of the Republic of Poland, Speaker of the Sejm, Speaker of the Senate, Prime Minister, 50 MPs, 30 senators, First President of the Supreme Court, President of the Supreme Administrative Court, Prosecutor General, President of the Supreme Audit Office, Ombudsman,

2) National Council of the Judiciary in the scope referred to in Art. 186 section 2,

3) decision-making bodies of local government units,

4) national bodies of trade unions and national authorities of employers' organizations and professional organizations,

5) churches and other religious associations,

6) entities specified in Art. 79 to the extent indicated therein.

Entities referred to in section 1 points 3-5, may submit such a request if the normative act concerns matters falling within their scope of activity.
Art. 192.

With an application in matters referred to in Art. 189, the following may apply to the Constitutional Tribunal: the President of the Republic of Poland, the Speaker of the Sejm, the Speaker of the Senate, the Prime Minister, the First President of the Supreme Court, the President of the Supreme Administrative Court and the President of the Supreme Audit Office.

Art. 193.

Each court may submit to the Constitutional Tribunal a legal question regarding the compliance of a normative act with the Constitution, ratified international agreements or an act, if the resolution of a case pending before the court depends on the answer to the legal question.

Art. 194.

The Constitutional Tribunal consists of 15 judges, elected individually by the Sejm for 9 years from among persons with outstanding legal knowledge. Re-election to the Tribunal is inadmissible.
The President and Vice-President of the Constitutional Tribunal are appointed by the President of the Republic of Poland from among the candidates presented by the General Assembly of Judges of the Constitutional Tribunal.
Art. 195.

The judges of the Constitutional Tribunal are independent in the exercise of their office and are subject only to the Constitution.
Judges of the Constitutional Tribunal are provided with working conditions and remuneration commensurate with the dignity of the office and the scope of their duties.
While holding office, judges of the Constitutional Tribunal may not belong to a political party, trade union or conduct public activities that are incompatible with the principles of independence of courts and judges.
Art. 196.

A judge of the Constitutional Tribunal may not be held criminally liable or deprived of liberty without the prior consent of the Constitutional Tribunal. A judge may not be detained or arrested, except when he is caught in the act of committing a crime, if his detention is necessary to ensure the proper course of the proceedings. The President of the Constitutional Tribunal is immediately notified of the detention, who may order the immediate release of the detainee.

Art. 197.

The organization of the Constitutional Tribunal and the procedure of proceedings before the Tribunal are determined by law.

STATE TRIBUNAL

Art. 198.

For violations of the Constitution or a statute in connection with the position held or within the scope of their office, the following persons are constitutionally liable before the State Tribunal: the President of the Republic of Poland, the Prime Minister and members of the Council of Ministers, the President of the National Bank of Poland, the President of the Supreme Audit Office, members of the National Broadcasting Council
Television, persons entrusted by the Prime Minister with the management of the ministry and the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces.
Deputies and senators also bear constitutional responsibility before the State Tribunal to the extent specified in Art. 107.
The types of penalties imposed by the State Tribunal are specified by law.
Art. 199.

The State Tribunal consists of a chairman, 2 deputy chairman and 16 members elected by the Sejm from outside the group of deputies and senators for the term of office of the Sejm. The deputy presidents of the Tribunal and at least half of the members of the State Tribunal should have the qualifications required to hold the position of judge.
The President of the State Tribunal is the First President of the Supreme Court.
Members of the State Tribunal are independent in their functions as judges of the State Tribunal and are subject only to the Constitution and laws.
Art. 200.

A member of the State Tribunal may not be held criminally liable or deprived of liberty without the prior consent of the State Tribunal. A member of the State Tribunal may not be detained or arrested, except when he is caught in the act of committing a crime, if his detention is necessary to ensure the proper course of proceedings. The chairman of the State Tribunal is immediately notified of the detention, who may order the immediate release of the detainee.

Art. 201.

The organization of the State Tribunal and the procedure before the Tribunal are determined by law.

Chapter IX
STATE CONTROL BODIES
AND PROTECTION OF THE LAW

SUPREME CHAMBER OF CONTROL

Art. 202.

The Supreme Audit Office is the supreme state audit body.
The Supreme Audit Office reports to the Sejm.
The Supreme Audit Office operates on the principles of collegiality.
Art. 203.

The Supreme Audit Office controls the activities of government administration bodies, the National Bank of Poland, state legal entities and other state organizational units from the point of view of legality, economy, expediency and reliability.
The Supreme Audit Office may audit the activities of local government bodies, municipal legal persons and other municipal organizational units from the point of view of legality, economy and reliability.
The Supreme Audit Office may also control, from the point of view of legality and economy, the activities of other organizational units and economic entities to the extent to which they use state or municipal assets or funds and fulfill their financial obligations to the state.
Art. 204.

The Supreme Audit Office submits to the Sejm:
1) analysis of the implementation of the state budget and monetary policy assumptions,

2) opinion on the discharge of the Council of Ministers,

3) information on inspection results, conclusions and speeches specified in the Act.

The Supreme Audit Office submits an annual report on its activities to the Sejm.
Art. 205.

The President of the Supreme Audit Office is appointed by the Sejm with the consent of the Senate for a term of 6 years and may be re-appointed only once.
The President of the Supreme Audit Office cannot hold any other position, except for the position of a university professor, or perform other professional activities.
The President of the Supreme Audit Office cannot belong to a political party, trade union or conduct public activities that are incompatible with the dignity of his office.
Art. 206.

The President of the Supreme Audit Office cannot be held criminally liable or deprived of liberty without the prior consent of the Sejm. The President of the Supreme Audit Office may not be detained or arrested, except when he is caught in the act of committing a crime and if his detention is necessary to ensure the proper course of proceedings. The Marshal of the Sejm is immediately notified of the detention, who may order the immediate release of the detainee.

Art. 207.

The organization and mode of operation of the Supreme Audit Office are determined by law.

OMBUDSMAN

Art. 208.

The Commissioner for Human Rights protects the freedoms and rights of humans and citizens specified in the Constitution and other normative acts.
The scope and manner of operation of the Ombudsman are determined by law.
Art. 209.

The Ombudsman is appointed by the Sejm, with the consent of the Senate, for a term of 5 years.
The Ombudsman cannot hold any other position, except that of a university professor, or perform other professional activities.
The Ombudsman cannot belong to a political party, trade union or conduct public activities that are incompatible with the dignity of his office.
Art. 210.

The Ombudsman is independent in his activities, independent of other state bodies and is responsible only to the Sejm on the terms specified in the Act.

Art. 211.

The Commissioner for Human Rights cannot be held criminally liable or deprived of liberty without the prior consent of the Sejm. The Ombudsman cannot be detained or arrested, except when he is caught in the act of committing a crime
if his detention is necessary to ensure the proper course of proceedings. The Marshal of the Sejm is immediately notified of the detention, who may order the immediate release of the detainee.

Art. 212.

The Commissioner for Human Rights annually informs the Sejm and the Senate about his/her activities and the state of observance of human and civil rights and freedoms.

NATIONAL RADIO AND TELEVISION COUNCIL

Art. 213.

The National Broadcasting Council protects freedom of speech, the right to information and the public interest in radio and television broadcasting.
The National Broadcasting Council issues regulations and adopts resolutions in individual matters.
Art. 214.

Members of the National Broadcasting Council are appointed by the Sejm, the Senate and the President of the Republic of Poland.
A member of the National Broadcasting Council may not belong to a political party, trade union or conduct public activities that are incompatible with the dignity of the function held.
Art. 215.

The principles and mode of operation of the National Broadcasting Council, its organization and detailed rules for appointing its members are specified by law.

Chapter X
PUBLIC FINANCES

Art. 216.

Financial resources for public purposes are collected and spent in the manner specified in the Act.
The acquisition, disposal and encumbrance of real estate, shares or stock as well as the issue of securities by the State Treasury, the National Bank of Poland or other state legal entities take place on the terms and in the manner specified in the Act.
A monopoly is established by statute.
Borrowing loans and granting financial guarantees and sureties by the state takes place on the terms and in the manner specified in the Act.
It is prohibited to take out loans or provide financial guarantees and sureties that would result in the state public debt exceeding 3/5 of the value of the annual gross domestic product. The method of calculating the value of the annual gross domestic product and state public debt is determined by law.
Art. 217.

The imposition of taxes and other public levies, the determination of entities, objects of taxation and tax rates, as well as the rules for granting reliefs and remissions and the categories of entities exempt from taxes are effected by statute.

Art. 218.

The organization of the State Treasury and the method of managing the State Treasury's assets are determined by law.

Art. 219.

The Sejm adopts the state budget for the financial year in the form of a budget act.
The principles and procedure for developing the draft state budget, the degree of its detail and the requirements to which the draft budget act should meet, as well as the principles and procedure for implementing the budget act are specified in the act.
In exceptional cases, state revenues and expenses for a period of less than one year may be determined by the Act on the provisional budget. The provisions relating to the draft budget act shall apply mutatis mutandis to the draft act on the provisional budget.
If the budget act or the act on the provisional budget have not entered into force on the day of the beginning of the budget year, the Council of Ministers conducts financial management on the basis of the submitted draft act.
Art. 220.

Increasing expenditure or limiting revenues planned by the Council of Ministers may not cause the Sejm to establish a larger budget deficit than that provided for in the draft budget act.
The budget law cannot provide for covering the budget deficit by incurring a liability in the central bank of the state.
Art. 221.

Legislative initiative regarding the Budget Act, the Act on the provisional budget, amendments to the Budget Act, the Act on contracting public debt and the Act on granting financial guarantees by the state rests exclusively with the Council of Ministers.

Art. 222.

The Council of Ministers submits to the Sejm no later than 3 months before the beginning of the financial year a draft budget act for the following year. In exceptional cases, it is possible to submit the project later.

Art. 223.

The Senate may adopt amendments to the budget act within 20 days from the date of its submission to the Senate.

Art. 224.

The President of the Republic of Poland signs the budget act or the act on the provisional budget presented by the Speaker of the Sejm within 7 days. The provision of Art. does not apply to the Budget Act and the Act on the provisional budget. 122 section 5.
If the President of the Republic of Poland applies to the Constitutional Tribunal regarding the constitutionality of the budget act or the act on the provisional budget before signing it, the Tribunal will rule on the matter no later than within 2 months from the date of submitting the application to the Tribunal.
Art. 225.

If, within 4 months from the date of submission of the draft budget bill to the Sejm, it is not presented to the President of the Republic of Poland for signature, the President of the Republic of Poland may order the shortening of the term of office of the Sejm within 14 days.

Art. 226.

The Council of Ministers, within 5 months from the end of the budget year, submits to the Sejm a report on the implementation of the Budget Act together with information on the state's debt.
The Sejm considers the submitted report and, after hearing the opinion of the Supreme Audit Office, adopts, within 90 days from the date of submitting the report to the Sejm, a resolution on granting or refusing to discharge the Council of Ministers.
Art. 227.

The central bank of the state is the National Bank of Poland. It has the exclusive right to issue money and to establish and implement monetary policy. The National Bank of Poland is responsible for the value of Polish money.
The governing bodies of the National Bank of Poland are: the President of the National Bank of Poland, the Monetary Policy Council and the Management Board of the National Bank of Poland.
The President of the National Bank of Poland is appointed by the Sejm at the request of the President of the Republic of Poland for a term of 6 years.
The President of the National Bank of Poland may not belong to a political party, trade union or conduct public activities that are incompatible with the dignity of his office.
The Monetary Policy Council consists of the President of the National Bank of Poland as chairman and persons with outstanding knowledge in the field of finance, appointed for 6 years, in equal numbers by the President of the Republic of Poland, the Sejm and the Senate.
The Monetary Policy Council establishes the monetary policy assumptions every year and submits them to the Sejm simultaneously with the submission of the draft budget act by the Council of Ministers. The Monetary Policy Council, within 5 months from the end of the budget year, submits to the Sejm a report on the implementation of the monetary policy assumptions.
The organization and principles of operation of the National Bank of Poland and the detailed rules for appointing and dismissing its bodies are determined by law.

Chapter XI
EXTRAORDINARY STATES

Art. 228.

In situations of particular threat, if ordinary constitutional measures are insufficient, an appropriate state of emergency may be introduced: martial law, state of emergency or state of natural disaster.
A state of emergency may be introduced only on the basis of an act, by way of a regulation, which is subject to additional public announcement.
The principles of operation of public authorities and the scope to which human and citizen freedoms and rights may be limited during individual states of emergency are determined by law.
The Act may determine the basis, scope and procedure for compensating property losses resulting from the restriction of human and civil rights and freedoms during a state of emergency.
Actions taken as a result of the introduction of a state of emergency must correspond to the degree of threat and should aim at restoring the normal functioning of the state as quickly as possible.
During a state of emergency, the Constitution, electoral regulations for the Sejm, Senate and local government bodies, the Act on the election of the President of the Republic of Poland and the Act on states of emergency cannot be changed.
During a state of emergency and within 90 days after its end, the term of office of the Sejm cannot be shortened, a national referendum cannot be held, elections to the Sejm, Senate, local government bodies or elections for the President of the Republic cannot be held, and the terms of office of these bodies shall be extended accordingly. Elections to local government bodies are only possible where a state of emergency has not been introduced.
Art. 229.

In the event of an external threat to the state, an armed attack on the territory of the Republic of Poland or when an international agreement provides for an obligation to jointly defend against aggression, the President of the Republic of Poland, at the request of the Council of Ministers, may introduce martial law on part or all of the territory of the state.

Art. 230.

In the event of a threat to the constitutional system of the state, the security of citizens or public order, the President of the Republic of Poland, at the request of the Council of Ministers, may introduce a state of emergency in part or the entire territory of the state for a specified period of time, not longer than 90 days.
The state of emergency may be extended only once, with the consent of the Sejm, and for a period not longer than 60 days.
Art. 231.

The President of the Republic of Poland shall submit the regulation on the introduction of martial law or emergency to the Sejm within 48 hours of signing the regulation. The Sejm shall immediately consider the regulation of the President of the Republic of Poland. The Sejm may repeal them by an absolute majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies.

Art. 232.

In order to prevent and eliminate the effects of natural disasters or technical failures bearing the characteristics of a natural disaster, the Council of Ministers may introduce a state of natural disaster on part or all of the territory of the state for a specified period of time, not longer than 30 days. This state of affairs may be extended with the consent of the Sejm.

Art. 233.

An act specifying the scope of restrictions on human and citizen freedoms and rights during martial law and state of emergency may not limit the freedoms and rights specified in Art. 30 (human dignity), art. 34 and art. 36 (citizenship), art. 38 (protection of life), art. 39, art. 40 and art. 41 section 4 (humane treatment), art. 42 (bearing liability ka
rnej), art. 45 (access to court), art. 47 (personal rights), art. 53 (conscience and religion), art. 63 (petitions) and art. 48 and art. 72 (family and child).
It is unacceptable to limit the freedoms and rights of humans and citizens solely because of race, gender, language, religion or lack thereof, social origin, birth or property.
An act specifying the scope of restrictions on human and citizen freedoms and rights in a state of natural disaster may limit the freedoms and rights specified in Art. 22 (freedom of economic activity), art. 41 section 1, 3 and 5 (personal freedom), art. 50 (inviolability of the home), art. 52 section 1 (freedom of movement and residence within the territory of the Republic of Poland), art. 59 section 3 (right to strike), art. 64 (property law), art. 65 section 1 (freedom of work), art. 66 section 1 (right to safe and hygienic working conditions) and art. 66 section 2 (right to rest).
Art. 234.

If during martial law the Sejm cannot convene, the President of the Republic, at the request of the Council of Ministers, issues regulations with the force of law to the extent and within the limits specified in Art. 228 section 3-5. These regulations are subject to approval by the Sejm at the next session.
Regulations referred to in section 1, are sources of generally applicable law.

Chapter XII
CHANGE OF THE CONSTITUTION

Art. 235.

A bill amending the Constitution may be submitted by at least 1/5 of the statutory number of Deputies, the Senate or the President of the Republic of Poland.
The Constitution is amended by an act adopted in the same wording by the Sejm and then within a period not longer than 60 days by the Senate.
The first reading of a bill amending the Constitution may take place no earlier than on the thirtieth day from the date of submission of the bill to the Sejm.
An act amending the Constitution is adopted by the Sejm by a majority of at least 2/3 of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of deputies, and by the Senate by an absolute majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of senators.
The adoption by the Sejm of an act amending the provisions of chapters I, II or XII of the Constitution may take place no earlier than on the sixtieth day after the first reading of the draft act.
If the Act amending the Constitution concerns the provisions of Chapter I, II or XII, the entities specified in section 1 may request, within 45 days from the date of adoption of the act by the Senate, an approval referendum be held. These entities submit a request in this matter to the Speaker of the Sejm, who orders an immediate referendum to be held within 60 days from the date of submission of the request. An amendment to the Constitution is adopted if a majority of voters support the change.
After completing the proceedings specified in section 4 and 6, the Marshal of the Sejm presents the adopted act to the President of the Republic of Poland for signature. The President of the Republic of Poland signs the act within 21 days from the date of presentation and orders its publication in the Journal of Laws of the Republic of Poland.

Chapter XIII
TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Art. 236.

Within 2 years from the date of entry into force of the Constitution, the Council of Ministers will submit to the Sejm draft laws necessary to apply the Constitution.
Acts implementing Art. 176 section 1 in the scope relating to proceedings before administrative courts will be adopted before the expiry of 5 years from the date of entry into force of the Constitution. Until these acts enter into force, the provisions regarding extraordinary review of judgments of the Supreme Administrative Court shall apply.
Art. 237.

Within the period of 4 years from the date of entry into force of the Constitution, offense cases are adjudicated by the committees for offenses at district courts, and the penalty of arrest is decided by the court.
An appeal against the decision of the board is heard by the court.
Art. 238.

The term of office of constitutional bodies of public authority and their members elected or appointed before the entry into force of the Constitution ends at the end of the period specified in the provisions in force before the entry into force of the Constitution.
If the provisions in force before the date of entry into force of the Constitution did not specify this term of office, and a period longer than that established by the Constitution has passed since the date of election or appointment, the constitutional term of office of public authorities or persons constituting their members expires one year from the date of entry into force. Constitution.
In the event that the provisions in force before the date of entry into force of the Constitution did not specify this term of office, and a period shorter than that established by the Constitution for constitutional public authority bodies or persons constituting their members has elapsed since the date of election or appointment, the period during which these bodies or persons served functions in accordance with the existing provisions shall be included in the term of office established in the Constitution.
Art. 239.

Within a period of 2 years from the date of entry into force of the Constitution, the decisions of the Constitutional Tribunal on the inconsistency with the Constitution of laws adopted before the date of its entry into force are not final and are subject to consideration by the Sejm, which may reject the ruling.
the Constitutional Tribunal by a 2/3 majority of votes, in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of deputies. This does not apply to judgments issued following legal questions to the Constitutional Tribunal.
Proceedings in cases involving the Constitutional Tribunal establishing a generally applicable interpretation of statutes initiated before the entry into force of the Constitution shall be discontinued.
On the day the Constitution enters into force, resolutions of the Constitutional Tribunal on the interpretation of statutes lose their universally binding force. Final court judgments and other valid decisions of public authorities taken taking into account the meaning of the provisions determined by the Constitutional Tribunal through the generally applicable interpretation of statutes remain in force.
Art. 240.

Within a period of one year from the date of entry into force of the Constitution, the budget law may provide for covering the budget deficit by incurring liabilities in the central bank of the state.

Art. 241.

International agreements ratified so far by the Republic of Poland on the basis of the constitutional provisions in force at the time of their ratification and published in the Journal of Laws are considered to be agreements ratified with prior consent expressed in the Act and the provisions of Art. 91 of the Constitution, if the content of the international agreement shows that they concern the categories of matters listed in Art. 89 section 1 of the Constitution.
Within 2 years from the entry into force of the Constitution, the Council of Ministers will present to the Sejm a list of international agreements containing provisions inconsistent with the Constitution.
Senators elected before the date of entry into force of the Constitution who are under 30 years of age retain their mandates until the end of the term of office for which they were elected.
Combining the mandate of a deputy or senator with a function or employment covered by the prohibition specified in Art. 103, causes the mandate to expire after one month from the date of entry into force of the Constitution, unless the deputy or senator resigns from the function earlier or their employment ceases.
Cases that are the subject of legislative proceedings either before the Constitutional Tribunal or the State Tribunal and commenced before the entry into force of the Constitution are conducted in accordance with the constitutional provisions in force on the date the case commences.
Within a period of 2 years from the date of entry into force of the Constitution, the Council of Ministers will determine which of the resolutions of the Council of Ministers and orders of ministers or other government administration bodies adopted or issued before the date of entry into force of the Constitution require - in accordance with the conditions specified in Art. 87 section 1 and art. 92 of the Constitution - replacing them with regulations issued on the basis of the authorization of an act, the draft of which the Council of Ministers will submit to the Sejm in due time. In the same period, the Council of Ministers will submit to the Sejm a draft act specifying which normative acts of government administration bodies issued before the date of entry into force of the Constitution become resolutions or orders within the meaning of Art. 93 of the Constitution.
The acts of local law and municipal regulations in force on the day the Constitution enters into force become acts of local law within the meaning of Art. 87 section 2 of the Constitution.
Art. 242.

They lose power:

Constitutional Act of October 17, 1992 on mutual relations between the legislative and executive authorities of the Republic of Poland and on local government (Journal of Laws No. 84, item 426, of 1995 No. 38, item 184, No. 150, item 729 and 1996 No. 106, item 488),
Constitutional Act of April 23, 1992 on the procedure for preparing and adopting the Constitution of the Republic of Poland (Journal of Laws No. 67, item 336 and of 1994 No. 61, item 251).
Art. 243.

The Constitution of the Republic of Poland enters into force 3 months from the date of its promulgation.


PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND